The Web Push flow, plain-language version
Your frontend loads a service worker file (public/sw.js) — think of it as a tiny background script the browser keeps alive independently of your page/tab.
User clicks "Enable notifications." The browser shows the native permission popup ("Allow/Block notifications"). If allowed, the browser generates a subscription — this is basically "an address the browser can be reached at, plus a lock/key pair to encrypt messages sent to it." That's the endpoint, p256dh, auth you asked about (explained below).
Frontend sends that subscription to your backend, which saves it in the DB, tied to that user.
Later, something happens (e.g. a grade gets published). Your backend code looks up which students should be notified, grabs their saved subscriptions, and calls web-push.sendNotification(subscription, message).
The web-push library encrypts the message using the keys from the subscription and sends it to the endpoint URL — which is actually a URL owned by the browser vendor (Google's push service for Chrome, Mozilla's for Firefox, etc.). That's the "middleman" that actually delivers it to the device — you don't manage it, it's built into the browser/OS.
The browser receives it and wakes up your service worker, even if the tab/site is closed, which shows the notification. If the student clicks it, the service worker opens the specific route you specified in the data payload.
So the "VAPID keys" are just your app's identity card — proof to the browser's push service that notifications claiming to be from you actually are. You generate this once for your whole app (not per user).
Now your specific questions
1. VAPID key generation & storage: Run this once in your project folder:
npx web-push generate-vapid-keys
This prints a public key and a private key (just two long strings — not files, not accounts). You:
Put the private key in your backend .env (e.g. VAPID_PRIVATE_KEY=...) — never expose this to the frontend.
Put the public key in your frontend env (e.g. NEXT_PUBLIC_VAPID_PUBLIC_KEY=...) — this one is safe to expose, the frontend needs it to create a subscription.
You generate this once ever for the whole project, not per student.
2. What endpoint, p256dh, auth are: When the browser creates a subscription, it returns an object like:
{
  "endpoint": "https://fcm.googleapis.com/fcm/send/abc123...",
  "keys": {
    "p256dh": "BN4G...",
    "auth": "k8Jk..."
  }
}
endpoint — the unique URL for that specific browser/device where the push service (Chrome/Firefox's own servers) will deliver the message. Each subscription (device/browser) has a different one.
p256dh — a public encryption key used to encrypt the notification payload so only that browser can read it.
auth — an extra secret used alongside p256dh for the encryption (prevents replay attacks).